# Ten Rules

<p class="subtitle">if you don't have time for the whole workshop</p>

For every beginning there has to be an ending,
but we don't talk about endings much.
There are thousands of books on Amazon about how to start a business;
there are only a handful about how to hand one over,
and none about how to wind one down.
Here's the short version:

Be sure you mean it.
:   Letting go will be hard on you,
    but *not* letting go will be even harder on your successors,
    so be sure you're actually going to do it.

Do it when others think it's time.
:   You are the last person to realize when you're too tired to be coding.
    You will often be the last person to realize that you ought to be moving on,
    so ask people and pay attention to what they say.

Explain what, when, and why.
:    Tell people that you're leaving and what the succession plan is as soon as possible
    (which in practice means "as soon as you think you won't have to revise what you have said publicly").

Don't pick a successor yourself.
:   You may have strong opinions about who should succeed you,
    but you should still check those opinions with someone more objective.

Train them before you go.
:   Share tasks with your successor for a few days or weeks:
    they will get to see how things actually work,
    and you'll discover things you would otherwise forget to tell them.
    Go on holiday for a week and leave your successor temporarily in charge.
    You'll discover even more things you would otherwise forget to pass on.

When you leave, leave.
:   It may be tempting to continue to have a role in the organization,
    but that usually leads to confusion,
    since people are used to looking to you for answers.

Have some fun before you go.
:   Don't just slog your way to the end and turn out the lights:
    take that back burner project you've been dreaming about and give it a shot.

Reflect on what you learned.
:   Whatever you have left will almost certainly not be the last thing you ever do.
    Take some time to think about what you could have done differently,
    write it down,
    and then move on:
    obsessing over only-ifs and might-have-beens won't help anyone.

Remember the good things too.
:   Many people are uncomfortable being praised—so uncomfortable,
    in fact,
    that English doesn't actually have an antonym for "mistake".
    Thank the people who made what you did successful,
    and give yourself a little credit as well.

Do something next.
:   People who start things usually aren't good with idleness,
    and idleness tends not to be good for them,
    so when you leave,
    leave for something,
    even if it's something small.
